all
right I think I'm live I've never done
this before uh so I'm uh figuring this
out as I go uh but um hi for anyone
who's here um my name is Dr Mark Eaton
I'm a licensed clinical psychologist uh
licens in the state of states of
California and New York I'm also a
specialist in the treatment of
pathological narcissism and Related
Disorders uh including PD um I'm author
of the book unmasking narcissism a guide
to understanding The Narcissist in your
life uh the books right up there over my
shoulder uh that's a Hands-On guide to
understanding the psychodynamics and the
interpersonal dynamics of pathological
narcissism and NPD written from a
compassionate and uh humanizing
perspective and it's available wherever
fine books are sold
um so I'm uh I'm
oh I can see okay there are people here
there's 23 people here uh great that's
fantastic uh like I said this is my
first outing doing a live stream um I'm
actually incredibly nervous uh hello uh
user
um I uh I had nightmares last night that
I would get in front of the camera
realize no one was here realize I didn't
have anything to talk about um and uh
and that the whole thing would just be a
flaming disaster so um hopefully that
won't happen but I thought I'd share
that with you uh in the interest of
being vulnerable and and uh accessible
and just letting people know how I feel
um but my hope is that you'll have some
good questions for me today uh and some
comments uh oh my gosh I see all these
people wow this is fantastic um I see
cluster B milkshake hi uh and uh and a
bunch of other people somebody from
Madrid Spain uh fantastic well thank you
all so much for showing up um and uh I'm
here to uh to answer your questions so
uh feel free to leave them over in the
chat
um oh okay somebody says that this
started in the middle of me mentioning
my book uh I I'll I'll just really
briefly introduce myself one more time
then my name's Dr Mark eonon I'm a
licensed psychologist and I specialize
in the treatment of pathological
narcissism and Rel
disorders okay so there's already a
question um am I familiar with narrative
therapy and do I see a parallel between
a preferred identity and a false self uh
and it looks like Bill Lumberg himself
asked that question um okay uh I'm I am
I have a passing familiarity with
narrative therapy um I have not done
narrative therapy myself nor am I
specifically trained in narrative
therapy uh I also haven't taught
narrative therapy um but I do I do sort
of know what it is and what it's about
um I think and and so I don't know
specifically about a preferred identity
although I'm imagining that from within
the narrative therapy framework uh so
for folks who aren't familiar with what
that is narrative therapy is sort of you
know we all have this way uh this story
right a narrative that we construct
about ourselves about our lives about
what's happening uh and those narratives
guide the way that we attribute meeting
to events and uh th those attributions
that we make based on the narrative that
we have are what drive you know our
emotional reactions uh they're what sort
of tell us you know what's going on and
what we should do about it so if
somebody has you know particularly sort
of maladaptive or unhelpful narrative uh
that they're they're kind of acting out
of and and uh conceptualizing experience
through um they're they're going to be
engaging in in path olical behavior um
and that's also going to going to
contribute to thing like things like
mood disorders and and anxiety disorders
and stuff like that so I'm imagining
that although I don't know for sure that
a preferred identity from within the
frame of narrative therapy uh would be
sort of um you know a preferred way of
seeing oneself um and and I I think that
that that borders on what a false self
is in psychoanalytic uh and
psychodynamic uh models although the
false FAL self is more deeply rooted I
think in unconscious conflict so it's it
is a a compensatory construct that is
developed very early in life uh in order
to defend against chronic experiences of
rejection um and um uh lapses in
empathic Attunement uh very early in
life so it's it's basically you could
think of it as the child's best attempt
to be or at least appear to be the
person that it's seems that their
caregivers need or want them to be um so
so having its roots very deeply in the
unconscious um oftentimes folks who you
know have a strong false
self-presentation that they're not aware
of it um and it's actually can be quite
challenging in clinical work to engender
insight to help the the patient get
insight into um that that false self-
experience and to begin to recognize it
as uh not you know not self
so I hope that answers your question uh
Lumberg 42 uh and thank you so much uh
for asking it oh I realized that I can
show questions okay
fantastic uh let's see I got somebody
from Kenya
here uh that's great hi thank you for
joining uh okay uh Roxy asks is
hypnotherapy useful for NPD um I don't
know um it's kind of a it's a little bit
of a Wild Frontier uh when it comes to
treatment of NPD a little bit um you
know a lot of people are trying out a
lot of different approaches uh there is
not a wide consensus uh in the field
about you know even how to best Define
uh narcissistic personality disorder and
there certainly isn't a consensus about
how best to treat it um I would say that
the leading approaches uh you know as is
typical they're um you know they're
they're sort of manualized
uh therapies and and all that means is
that somebody took kind of a a complex
uh concept concept uh and and and
distilled it down into discrete sort of
steps that a person would take a
clinician would take uh in in treating
the issue so one of those is
transference Focus therapy and the other
one would be mentalization based therapy
um also dialectical behavioral therapy
is a popular approach that's being
adapted uh it was developed for
borderline personality disorder and it's
being adapted for narcissistic
personality disorder you know uh the
thing about hypnotherapy is that there
just isn't uh to my knowledge a like a
really wide
empirical uh like a strong empirical
base uh for uh for using hypnotherapy um
you know I mostly and I'm sure I'll get
some flak for this but mostly um you
know when I've seen hypnotherapy used
it's been for things like smoking
sensation and and stuff like that um I I
wouldn't put a lot of stock in in its
ability to really make a substantial
difference in um in something as as kind
of with roots as deep as a personality
disorder uh so you know I've if if
you're if you're thinking about looking
at hypnotherapy or or something like
that I would actually steer you in a
different direction I don't think that's
going to you're not going to get the
best bang for your buck um pursuing
hypnotherapy for NPD but thank you so
much for the question
um okay Sarah Eva says does inner child
how does inner child work help with NPD
treatment um you know I I guess I'm a
from my perspective I think all
Psychotherapy is in a way inner child
work um I know that you're speaking
about a a specific approach that would
be more explicitly defined as okay now
we're going to work on healing the inner
child you know uh talking to the inner
child conceptualizing the inner child
and and you know what that child's needs
might be what the what the pain they're
holding might be and sort of talking to
that child explicitly um I think that's
great I don't I don't have any issue
with that I don't tend to do it uh so
much uh but I do often reference uh when
it feels relevant in the treatment you
know like I think there's I think
there's a a part of you here that's
that's very young or I think there's a
you know sort of a hurt child who who's
speaking uh I can I can hear that part
of you speaking when you talk about you
know whatever it is that the the
person's talking about and I do invite
patients to imagine that child and to
imagine um how they might how they might
comfort that child because I I do think
that that can be um an incredibly um
impactful um intervention and and I
think perhaps most importantly it
engenders uh self-compassion which um
the evidence shows is um just so crucial
for NPD people with NPD they they just
they don't have a
realistic uh self-image it's it's one of
the defining characteristics right that
the the self-image is not realistic uh
it's not stable uh and it's not positive
right basically positive and we need all
those three things to be true uh in
order to have a healthy self image
healthy self-esteem and the core of NPD
is faulty self-esteem management uh and
so I I do think that helping somebody to
create a more compassionate uh image of
who they are and and who they were and
how the ways that they were hurt when
they were very young are showing up in
their present-day life and motivating
some of the defenses and and other
issues that they're experiencing can be
incredibly helpful thank you for the
question yeah okay so Terry asks how
would I approach a person with NPD to
make them aware of their
condition um you know I don't I don't
have to worry about that so much anymore
because people they they seek me out you
know already kind of being aware of or
they somewhat aware of their condition
um but earlier in my career uh before I
kind of got this reputation for being a
specialist in this area um colleagues
would refer narcissistic patients to me
and and sometimes you know the patient
would have no idea that that's why they
were referred and and it would be um up
to me to find a way to sort of break
that news to them um you know I I think
the thing is um and and I'm of two minds
about this on the one hand I can see
real value to you know having a
diagnosis right have to the person you
know having that that label that that
name to put to their experience and and
that that that diagnosis can reinforce
the need for for treatment right
especially when you know they they might
go into maybe a more defended or
grandiose phase of the disorder um in
which there would be a tendency to
minimize the need for for treatment and
for help and support and that sort of
thing so I think having that kind of
like like no I'm I'm a diagnosed I'm a
diagnosed narcissist can can help a
person kind of stay grounded in the need
for treatment um during those phases on
the other hand um I don't put a lot of
stock in you know diagnosing uh for the
longest time in my career I I kind of
didn't do it unless I had to because you
know insurance reimbursement or records
release request or something like that
um and and I that's because I think in
the field there's a tendency to uh reify
um disorders so and what that means is
just basically to say well you know
something like um you know but I don't
know pick a disorder right um
it uh generalized anxiety disorder that
that that that is sort of a to to feel
like that is a disease in the same way
that you know a met like a influenza is
a disease right
that you could locate like okay this is
the virus this is the particle this is
the faulty brain circuit this is the you
know whatever it is that is biologically
based that is driving
this disorder okay so that would that
would be like reifying the disorder um
you know mental disorders they're
they're decided by committee right uh
the American Psychiatric associate
Association they get together on a uh
you know semi-regular basis they review
the literature they look at the evidence
and they say okay what you know what are
we going to call this disorder right
where where are we going to draw the
lines around this syndrome right okay
this syndrome uh okay we feel like the
evidence is substantial enough to call
this a disorder but this one over here
not so much uh and and that's a constant
process of you know review and revision
um I think it's much more helpful and
important uh in a clinical setting to be
making meaning of experience uh and to
you know so when I give patients
feedback I I'm I'm talking to them about
you know I'm I'm trying to use
experience near terminology to talk
about what they're actually experiencing
and and only every so often if it feels
like it might be helpful am I connecting
that to some conceptual you know
explicitly like conceptual framework
like a okay well this is that diagnosis
or this is this diagnosis so anyway
that's that's from a clinical
perspective from if you're just talking
about somebody in your life um and that
you think might have NPD uh the way that
I would talk to them about this is in
terms of self-esteem um and emotional
insight and um you know if they seem
like areas in their life where it seems
like there may be deficits uh or
disabilities and ways that they might be
compensating for those that that aren't
so so helpful um so I I don't think you
actually need to use the word narcissism
or NPD at all in fact I would probably
advise against it just because it's so
stigmatized uh in our culture um but I
think it's perfectly valid to talk
somebody about their self-esteem about
how it seems hard for them to ask for
help or support about how you notice
that sometimes it it seems like they're
actually feeling insecure but but maybe
they're not even aware of it um stuff
like that uh and and always is just
leaving space for disagreement and you
know for the fact that you don't
actually know what's going on inside of
them and I I think that's just good
practice across the board um and you
know people you know they have to want
they have to want treatment and and
nobody's going to go for treatment if
they don't recognize that there's an
issue uh so you know and that can be
incredibly difficult and typically you
know you're not going to be the one who
convinces them that there's an issue
typically it's going to be kind of like
uh circumstances conspiring you know
coming together uh to overwhelm
whatever defensive you know Matrix they
have going on uh and and then there's
something like a collapse and then they
might be open to uh seeking help and
those kinds of collapses they can happen
for some people you know just once a
decade and for other people they happen
multiple times a day uh and that and
that's just the variation in in this
disorder so I hope that's helpful um and
thank you so much for the
question all right so we got regj here
asking if I've thought about the use of
psychedelics and treatment of
pathological narcissism I have um and
I've actually had patients who used
psychedelics and experimented with
psychedelics and to mixed results um one
patient in particular uh was using
psychedelics and um I I would have to
say they they helped I'd have to say
they were beneficial for that patient um
others you know not so much and that's
there's such wide individual variation
um in this in this disorder um you know
for the person that it helped the way
that it helped uh was that it brought
them closer to internal experiences
against which they were heavily defended
um and it allowed them to create sort of
more space inside of themselves for
those parts of them those vulnerable
Parts those insecure Parts those ashamed
parts to coexist with you know the the
maybe more grandiose or compensatory
self-image um and uh and and that that
was a that made a that made a huge
difference um I think it's absolutely
possible to get there without
psychedelics I'm not a psychiatrist I'm
not a medical doctor this is is not me
saying hey kids go go do drugs uh this
is just me saying in my experience I
have I've seen it go both ways um and I
think there's a case to be made for um
in in in some
people a beneficial effect I think
there's also a case to be made you know
that in some people it would make things
worse um you know because uh
psychedelics they they kind of degrade
uh your experience of reality right and
and reality and fantasy become
profoundly merged uh when you're on
psychedelics um depending on the dose
and Etc and for some people that that
would be a bad thing uh especially folks
who are already having trouble kind of
dealing with you know what's real and
what isn't um so thank you so much for
the
question all right Joshua says what's
the difference between superficial charm
and real charm in association with
narcissism and is the distinction
observed in my clinical
practice um yeah you
know I have to think about this for just
a second
um okay so I there's kind of a way that
I feel like charm is charm and somebody
who Charming is charming
um I think that there can be a kind of
charm that is
about expressing
authentic uh feelings and and and you
know um
interpersonal um desires right so uh you
know um people can be incredibly
charming and vulnerable at the same time
or you know I mean and that's just
that's just kind of a gift that some
people have I feel like um the the false
self presentation that's common in
narcissism will include some element of
superficial charm uh and that's that's
the idea there is to well it's it's
overdetermined so there's on on the one
hand it's about trying to defensively
minimize you know any perceived flaws
right
so uh you know somebody who's kind of
charming and funny and witty and
whatever you know um Life of the Party
well that there's then they're they're
feeling less vulnerable they're feeling
less exposed um and and that experience
right so if they're able to be charming
and kind of um likable then other people
are going to respond you know by liking
them and by by providing positive
mirroring uh and then the person is able
to use that positive mirroring in in the
service of kind of propping up and
fortifying that false
self image uh or and by false you know
when I'm talking about false self we
could also be calling it kind of a um a
defensive positive self-image or a
defensive grandiose self-image basically
it's it's that the person feels so
collapsed and so chaotic and so empty on
the inside that there is this kind of
edifice that's constructed this armor
that's constructed on top of it and and
that's sort of where they try to to stay
but that armor needs to be constantly
reinforced uh because there's always
that um underlying dysphoric experience
that that's that's degrading that armor
and and threatening to pull them down
into um into the the sort of empty or
fragmenting experience that that's
underneath of it and so and so the
person is constantly trying to convince
themselves and convince other people
that no this is who I really am you know
um and and charm works in the service of
that and I do I see that in my practice
um all the time and um you know what I
do with it is is I I basically I just
sit with it when I when I see it um I
try not to gratify the uh the desire or
the pull you know to to positively
mirror that that false
self-presentation uh but I also try not
to to go under it because that never
works I try not to kind of you know like
try to pull the person into like because
that that would feel almost sadistic
right like let's know you're miserable
like look see um instead uh just sit
with it you know um and and I try to
validate the authenticity that's behind
it um which is you know that the person
really kind
of feels that they need to be the best
they need to be Charming they need to be
shiny and perfect and idealized in order
order to be any kind of a self at all
and that's actually if I can I try to
stay grounded in the tragedy of that and
and see The Superficial charm through
that lens and when I do that I find that
kind of however I I sit with the
superficial charm tends to be
therapeutic um as long as you try to
stay connected to the authentic person
who's underneath that so uh thank you so
much for the question uh Joshua
um have I read Nathan Brandon's six
pillars of self-esteem I've not um but
I'm I'm wondering if you recommend it
and uh you know if so um i' I'd be
interested in checking it
out okay
um let's
see
okay battle pass of the fortnite hey Dr
eonon hey
just checking in have you watched
Breaking Bad before and if so is there a
potential NPD diagnosis for Walter White
many have said that is the case though I
do not think so really you don't think
you don't think so well um I yes I've
watched Breaking Bad in its entirety uh
and I've also watched um uh Better Call
Saul and I think both are uh just
phenomenal um but I yes I do think that
uh Walter White is um a narcissistic
character uh in fact uh that is an
example that I use when I do clinical
training um so every once in a while
I'll do clinical trainings for
clinicians about how to conceptualize
and treat pathological narcissism and
when I talk about different
presentations of pathological narcissism
I use Walter White as an example of um
of covert uh
grandiosity um so you know and I don't
want to give any spoilers away if you
haven't seen Breaking Bad go watch it
it's spectacular but in the beginning of
Breaking Bad he is this kind of
unassuming high school chemistry teacher
right but the first few episodes give
you a glimpse into the covert
grandiosity that's kind of seething and
raging under the surface right um that
he feels that he was uh cheated out of
his fortune and Glory uh by his
colleagues that he resents uh his kind
of mild mannered existence uh that he
feels that he's deserves and is entitled
to um a much broader impact uh on the
world um and and and there's also a kind
of narcissistic rage that goes along
with that uh that comes out periodically
throughout the series um and and so uh
yeah I think that Walter White is a um a
fantastic example of um of a particular
narcissistic
constellation thank you so much for the
question okay one
two isn't the basic issue with mental
disorders like
NPD is is fear and how is how fear is
handled if at all or if someone simply
freezes the freezing in the face of fear
is the
worst
um I think that one of the central
experiences in NPD whether it's
conscious or unconscious is um
attachment Ang I'm sorry um attachment
avoidance uh because there's uh kind of
a crippling fear that if the if the
person gets too close to other people
that they will be exposed to um
intolerable rejection and uh the feel
and the feeling of Shame shame um and
humiliation and so I I do think that
fear uh in the form of that anxiety is a
central facet of pathological
narcissism um and and yeah the way that
that fear is handled um in the form of
typically a dismissing
avoidant
um attachment style or possibly a
fearful avoidant attachment style either
way uh the person has a tendency to
minimize their need for emotional
intimacy for closeness for attachment uh
and anytime somebody brings their own
need for attachment to that person
there's a tendency to defensively uh
dismiss um that the validity of that
person's feelings and that shows up in
the form of um what most people would
call impaired empathy and I think that's
valid but I I think that that impaired
empathy is often really about attachment
avoidance which is based on fear um so
thank you for the
question uh John J Gillan is asking if I
see NPD as someone with a disorder of
the self like James Masterson who were
never able to bring together a
constituted sense of self and if so how
to create a constituted sense of self so
yeah I think um NPD is a disorder of the
self um I tend to look at it through uh
a combination of lenses one of them is
object relations Theory one of them is
self psychology and the third would be
the Contemporary relational um model in
psychoanalysis
um all of those are just kind of looking
at different ways that the
the
um Damage Done by by chronic relational
trauma to the self emerges in the form
of narcissistic
pathology um so you know I I I think I I
don't look at it so much as a
constituted sense of self but more as
kind of a lack of a individuated sense
of self um and uh and and an attempt to
compensate for that and by individuated
I mean you know we all emerge right from
this kind of
[Music]
um f Fusion between self and other right
so the are you know over over time
during the first few years of life you
know we we kind of separate out these
mutually dependent Co originating
constructs of self and other right um
and and and those have a lot to do with
each other always and and necessarily
right so what isn't self is by
definition other and what isn't other is
by definition self and the qualities of
the self inform necessarily the
qualities of the experience of other
people um
and when somebody has not been able to
kind
of create two
distinct uh differentiated constructs of
self and others but rather they're still
kind of fused together um I think that
that that's a recipe for all kinds of TR
um and uh and you know that involves uh
boundary like profound boundary
confusions um the presence of what we
would call primitive introjects which is
sort of like the the feeling that
someone else is somehow intrusively or
um invasively a part of you uh you know
the need to rely on how other people
seem to experience you in order to
constitute sort of a sense of self
so I think there are lots of different
ways to conceptualize a self and self-
experience um and you know that this
goes all the way back to you know Freud
essentially and his notion of the ego
right um and uh so without getting to
like Technical and stuff like that
that's that's my answer um thank you for
the
question let's see
uh
so XX is asking me is it necessary for
people to know they have NPD in order to
heal and can they conceptualize their
struggles as childhood emotional neglect
people pleasing or perfectionism and
still he heal yeah yeah I don't I don't
think there's any magic in the label of
NPD I think um you know I I essentially
see uh Psychotherapy as a as a form of
reparenting um and so you know
either way whether we call it NPD or we
don't we're still dealing with um very
early uh parts of the self and their
strivings uh and um and and then on on
top of that we're dealing with the
layers of defenses um and and affect
that that have been built on top of that
kind of wounded
core I think we can we can heal that
wounded core without calling it n PD um
and and that works too yeah so thank
you Peanut's asking what are the
outcomes that I've seen in terms of
recovery from NPD and how much of a
recovery have I observed what do I think
is a realistic
outcome
um yeah so um I've I've seen lots of
different outcomes um I I have have seen
um NPD remit I've seen uh you know
patients who I would diagnose with NPD
and they no longer I would no longer
diagnose them with
NPD um as I've stated in uh some of my
videos though you know um we all have
like one or more dominant personality
Styles and those personality styles are
defined by our core conflicts and those
core conflicts are based on early
experience in combination with genetics
and temperament and whatever else right
and so um those conflicts they sit at
the core of who we are and they motivate
the defensive adaptations that we
develop that we would call personality
right um and so you know um I I use
different references for what those
personality Styles might be when I do
diagnostic assessments for NPD I use an
assessment instrument that is based on
you know kind of a a model of those
different personality uh Styles or
prototypes or syndromes um but syndromes
is a bad name because that it's it's
possible to have and this is the point
I'm trying to make it's possible to have
a person a narcissistic personality
style where your core concerns in life
are about self-worth and
self-efficacy um and for that not and
for you not to be pathological it's it's
possible for you to be a perfectly
healthy individual who just happens to
be motivated by some insecurities about
whether or not you're good enough um and
I I think we see that a lot um that
particular personality style like when
we watch the Academy Awards you know
like I think that that that there's a
way that that personality style tends
toward um performance and tends toward
you know try trying to be larger than
life to get seen to get
validated but that's not necessarily
intrinsically pathological um I think
that when it when it becomes
pathological is when those concerns are
so big and so Central and they take up
so much space inside that they derail
the person's life and and they um start
getting in the way of holding a job of
having mutually satisfying relationships
of having realistic stable and positive
self-esteem um when that's happening
that's when we start when we would call
it pathological narcissism and when that
is so um when that's taking up so much
space in the person that their whole
world revolves around it that's when we
call it
NPD um so when somebody has
NPD the the goals that I have in mind is
to increase their ability to tolerate
the es and flows of positive and
negative
self-esteem increase their capacity to
have a a realistic self-image um and
through the use of you know kind of the
therapeutic relationship over time to
help build a more stable internal
Foundation um such that the the
self-esteem isn't fluctuating so widely
um and so there's more stability of
self-esteem so basically to to lessen
the amount of distress that is
experienced by the person and with lower
distress and greater stability um you
you're going to have fewer problems and
that
um personality disorder is going to
shrink down to something that's more
manageable maybe it only shows up in a
few places in their life or maybe only
when they're really triggered or really
overwhelmed or something like that um
and and at that point we would say oh
well there's not a personality disorder
anymore now it's just a kind of a
circumscribed issue and you know they
can stay in therapy and keep working on
it and and I I often recommend that they
do um I you know how often does that
happen well that's that's hard work
right uh there's a book I've got on my
shelf here
um let's
see
yeah okay
uh characterological transformation the
hard work Miracle this is by Stephen
Johnson highly recommend Stephen Johnson
love his stuff he's also got another
book called humanizing The narcissistic
style I don't know if you could hear
that my I wasn't looking at the camera
humanizing the narcissistic Style
Stephen Johnson uh he's one of my heroes
um highly highly recommend it it's
clinical stuff it's written for
clinicians but it is good stuff um and
you know he calls that kind of
transformation the hard work Miracle
right so it's not easy takes a long time
uh it takes commitment and dedication um
but it is absolutely possible
um so I I hope that answers your
question
let's
see uh good question okay T Wells is
asking do people with NPD have a true
self I've seen the work of C of a
certain
Professor uh is that that vacan not sure
um well known on YouTube who says they
don't it's so disheartening and it keeps
me stuck in hopelessness
well um yes yes there is a true self
okay so what what does it even mean
um here's the problem and I just I
responded to a YouTube comment on
another video this morning to this
effect the person was basically saying
well there's no true self to heal so
healing is impossible right and and
that's a
philosophical debate you know is there a
true self or isn't there a true self
well I don't know and and neither does
anybody else and there's really no way
to verify that empirically I mean we
might as well ask how many angels can
dance on the head of a pin you know um I
I don't know right and and furthermore
it's not my place to to posit you know
whether or not a person has an authentic
self or a true self versus this false
self but I think that they necessarily
have to have a true self uh whatever it
is that's under the false
self-presentation and that maintains the
need for a false self-presentation I
would call an authentic self and that
that can be rooted in biology it can be
so deeply unconscious that it's just
rooted in biology right and Bessel
Vander Bessel Vander culk uh you know
his body the I'm sorry his book the body
keeps the score talks about this a
little
bit um but basically he's talking about
embodied trauma right uh trauma that
can't be processed up here but it's felt
in here somewhere uh it's upset stomach
or it's you know whatever it is right um
that is an authentic experience right
it's it's just encoded at at the level
of of the somatic um but there are also
people you know whose whose false self-
defenses crumble and collapse into
distress despair rage um you know you
name it uh on a fairly regular basis and
I would call all of those authentic
experiences too right anything that
isn't compensatory and that isn't
designed to put out this kind of
self-sufficient facade is to my mind
authentic experience and the goal of the
work that I do in therapy is to try to
increase the person's access to those
authentic thoughts and feelings and
experiences um and to help them
recognize that those are rooted in
what's real in what's true for them so
joy and sorrow right um and and often I
find that the
easiest uh route to authentic experience
is grief um
so going
into whatever is there that's
painful uh I I I feel like that is
typically
authentic um so that's my answer I you
know gosh I'm so sorry to read that
you're feeling disheartened and
hopeless I don't think I just I don't
think you need to feel that way I don't
um I think that it it can certainly seem
hopeless and especially if you like look
on YouTube for more than 10 minutes um
you know yeah that that's a bleak
landscape um but uh in my experience the
authenticity is absolutely there 100% um
and it is also typically accessible
um although there are some heavily
defended presentations where the
grandiosity is is fused with a kind of
sadism and a kind of psychopathy and a
kind of aggression
uh we would call that malignant
narcissism um and uh and and that that
presentation that's a tougher nut to
crack no no pun intended and don't mean
to I realize that could be uh I'm not
calling people nuts uh just using the
idiomatic expression but anyway um
that's a that's a harder problem to
solve um and that's because the
experience of vulnerability is quickly
short-circuited uh and turned
into sadistic aggression
um and um you know I I would say that's
that that's a that's a less positive uh
prognosis um again not hopeless uh if
anytime there is buyin and the person
wants to get better I believe
firmly uh with 100% of my being that it
is possible to
heal
okay I was wondering if I could talk
about Jennifer says I was wondering if I
if I could talk about what to expect as
a person with NPD ages gets into their
70s and Beyond does does npt Behavior
NPD Behavior change with age yeah I was
just reading a a thing uh about this uh
today um let me see if I can find
it longitudinal course okay here we
go
uh let's see
okay yeah longitudal course
uh and now that I moved I resized my
window and I lost it hold on one sec
okay so this is this is taken from an
article in Focus the lifelong Journal of
learning in Psychiatry um Elsa
ronningstam and um and uh eagle
or uh Weinberg are the authors uh it
appeared in
2022 okay and they say
um that overall Studies have documented
the Persistence of narcissistic
pathology even among patients who who
improve symptomatically okay so by the
way this is without treatment right this
is just kind of what happens as a person
gets older patients with the disorder
tend to improve slowly and gradually and
Rapid improvements have not been
documented Studies have used categorical
diagnosis of the disorder and tended to
oh studies that have used categorical
diagnosis of the disorder have tended to
document symptomatic improvements
whereas studies that relied on
dimensional measures have tended to
demonstrate
stability okay um so what they're saying
is it's in part how you conceptualize
the disorder um
so uh but but they're also saying here
um if there is paranoid thinking
antisocial traits and EG syntonic
aggression so kind of what I was just
describing in response to the other
question uh those things impede
Improvement um other things like history
of adversity employment or interpersonal
functioning have not been tested uh and
they've got sort of a chart here um and
they're saying you know according to
these different studies here's what
they've found um the one that that has
the oldest population is ages 18 to 60
that's Durban incline published in 2006
and they say that uh there's a stable
course in the disorder so it really
doesn't get better as a person ages um
without
intervention okay uh
so that's just one study um but you
know that's what the that's what the
empirical literature suggests so thank
you for your question um oh my gosh
there's so many questions I just I'm
only like six minutes in to the to the
questions I'm gonna have to do this
again uh but I'm just I'm overwhelmed by
um how many people have showed up and
how many questions you have so thank you
um let's see oh uh
gosh uh thank you Crispen I'll I'll take
the compliment um thanks I'm I'm doing
well uh let's
see how do you know if a narcissist is
willing well they they go to
therapy
um
whoair uh since the range of behaviors
of someone with NPD May fluctuate
between let's say NPD BPD and HPD and
paranoid avoidant Etc isn't it more
accurate to look at someone with NPD as
someone with Bo instead BPO I'm assuming
means borderline personality
organization uh yeah I I do in fact um
anytime a person has a personality
disorder I'm immediately thinking them
as borderline personality organization
and for anybody who doesn't know what
that means
um one way of conceptualizing
personality is to look at it on a
developmental Continuum okay we at the
bottom you've got something called
psychotic organization and at the top
you've got healthy personality
organization and in between psychotic
and healthy uh you've got borderline and
then you've got neurotic each of those
is defined by a part of the personality
that is
not um totally developed okay so uh in
The Psychotic organization you're
talking about somebody whose kind of ego
capacities are so underdeveloped that
even kind of dealing with the
distinction between reality and fantasy
is
problematic um it does that's not
doesn't mean they have schizophrenia now
this is this is kind of like a a a way
of gauging the severity of a personality
organization um somebody who's uh got
the borderline personality organization
okay they're on the border between
psychotic and neurotic okay because
when
psychoanalytic theories were first being
developed you know everything was
neurotic or psychotic right uh neurotic
means that they've sort of successfully
navigated the edipo conflict um in
Freudian terms but in in more
contemporary terms neurotic means that
they're they are capable of having what
are called whole object relationships uh
so that means that remember earlier I
was talking about how the self and the
object kind of
separate into these distinct constructs
that are still mutually dependent but
distinct inside the person that when a
person does that that's the neurotic
personality organization there's a clear
sense of self and there's a clear sense
of other people and they they're not
kind of Blended together in this kind of
soupy mix that gets really confusing for
the person for somebody at the
borderline level that's when their self
and other are still kind of in mesed
okay and that results in very
problematic ways of thinking feeling and
relating because the distinction between
self and other is not clear and so they
tend to rely on U problematic defenses
like projection projective
identification um splitting uh acting
out stuff like that okay
so and that and those are the kinds of
defenses that tend to uh Define
personality disorders across the board
um and so yeah I I I think of person
borderline personality organization
that's my primary thought when I'm
working with somebody who has a
personality
disorder but um not all people have NPD
right there are pathological narcissism
presentations that I wouldn't put in the
borderline range I would I would see
them as kind of hovering uh in the
neurotic low neurotic to very high
borderline range but maybe most of the
time in that kind of low neurotic range
um and uh and so I don't think that
looking at it in terms of BP is is more
helpful in in those instances I also
think that um there's something to be
said for okay so broadly speaking the
personality is organized in a certain
you know
uh Stratus of of you know development
right but um each personality disorder
uh is defined by Central characteristics
Central ways of Defending um against
charact you know Central issues that are
that Define that particular personality
disorder uh and so I think that it's
helpful to retain the idea of NPD for
that reason as well um thank you so much
for the
question let's see
uh
do I know anything about how to treat
HPD histrionic personality disorder or
any experts you know focused on how to
treat HPD I don't know any experts
focused on that
um I think by and large when we're
talking about cluster B personality
disorders with the exception of
antisocial personality disorder the
treatment approach is going to be
similar um and that's why you know
things like DBT and and MBT uh are being
adapted originally developed for
borderline but being adapted for NPD um
and I think the same goes for HPD as
well um I do I have treated patients
with HPD um and uh you there's just some
different things to watch out for
different you know counter transference
polls uh in the in the treatment
relationship um tend to rely on slightly
different characteristic defenses but I
think by and large cluster B personality
disorders again with the exception of
antisocial uh are about a wounded Andor
fragmenting experience of self uh and
confusion between self and others um and
and they tend to be acted out they tend
to externalize that conflict and acted
out in their uh close
relationships are all vulnerable
narcissists introverts introverts this
is from our divine Mouse Overlord uh who
looks like he's um I don't want to I
don't to piss this guy off he's got a
he's holding a Cleaver um but uh are
they all introverts or have I met
exceptions okay so this is a great this
is a great question um first of all uh
the idea that there are vulnerable
narcissists and grandiose narcissists I
think is misleading um I think that all
narcissistic presentations involve kind
of a smush of grandiose and vulnerable
aspects
um so you know but that being said uh
some configurations are more prone to
narcissistic collapse than others and we
could call that vulnerable narcissism
but I I don't think that they're
necessarily introverts I think that a
person can be extroverted and also
vulnerable what what really makes the
distinction between vulnerable and
grandiose kind of phenotypes is um is
the ease with which the grandiose
defenses crumble into the fragmenting
self-experience
underneath uh let's
see are they looking to create new
therapies for
NPD uh yeah I would say yes
um you know transference focused
Psychotherapy is a is a good example of
that that's created that's developed by
Otto kernberg and he's a famous for you
know um a famous object relations
theorist uh and and clinician
um uh you know and his whole career is
about NPD um and
so he developed tfp uh specifically you
know for NPD
essentially let's see many of the
Concepts and ideas I present sound
applicable to many forms of Personality
Disorder or childhood trauma what makes
NPD treatment specific in comparison
yeah well that's because they are um
again it this and this gets into the
previous question about borderline
personality organization um the
personality disorders H are remarkably
similar um in many respects and this is
one of the reasons why you know I'm
always online you know in my videos
being like well this is a mental illness
right this is there's there's nothing
fundamentally different about people
with NPD that sets them apart as
incurable or untreatable or the devil
incarnate or or whatever it is right
that the kind of stigma is suggesting
um personality disorders are personality
disorders and uh they they're they tend
to you know have very similar
Central um deficits and uh and and
then some characteristic ways of
compensating for those deficits um and
uh and NPD the deficit is about
self-esteem uh and and the
characteristic way of compensating has
to do with the grandiose false self or
compensatory positive model of self
that's developed and that then is prone
to collapse exposing the person to those
Central
deficits
okay Orin considers NPD a manifestation
of cptsd that's that's complex
post-traumatic stress disorder that's an
upand cominging way of conceptualizing
trauma I happen to agree um I do think
that NPD as well as most personality
disorders uh are manifestations of
cptsd any substantial success in healing
by S I'm not sure what SE is um but EMDR
that's eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing mindfulness Etc I think
mindfulness is great um I think
mindfulness is it's I recommend it to my
patients um I think that that's a great
way to develop self-compassion it's a
great way to increase your ability to
tolerate distressed States uh without
acting them out uh it's a great way to
um increase your Insight and um and your
empathy
EMDR uh gosh I don't know much about
EMDR that's not it's not something I've
ever really looked at very
closely um I do I and I I might get this
wrong but uh I was uh I went to a
training once and they were talking
about EMDR and I remember the kind of
the takeway takeaway of it was that EMDR
is great for discret traumatic events
uh but it's maybe not so great for
chronic uh or complex uh trauma and I
don't know if that's true or not uh it
might not be but that's that that was
the takeaway at one training that I
attended so if I'm wrong about that I
apologize all all the people out there
who have benefited from EMDR or practice
it um anyway thanks for the
question
uh Lumberg is asking is there a notion
of things as mirrors instead of people
is mirrors yes yeah um so what we're
really talking about is self-object
experiences um self-object experiences
or any experience that's used to shore
up reconstitute or Define the experience
of self um when we're very young
self-object experiences tend to be um uh
more about you
know uh other people right they tend to
be like you know I idealize dad and and
dad is a selfobject to me and so you
know therefore I'm great too or you know
I remember when I was a kid I wanted to
be Indiana Jones uh and Superman right
those were my idealizations because I
was a kid in the 80s and um so those
were self objects for me right um and
and I you know the qualities of super
man uh I took those in as interjects and
they they became in some way you know
Central facets of who I was at that
particular point in time Luke Skywalker
was another one
um so so but as we get older right our
self-object experiences they tend to be
be less concrete and tangible and more
abstract right so now you know my
self-object experience isn't Superman
right or Indiana Jones or Luke Skywalker
it's you know I my profession is is a
self-object experience for me right it
helps Define who I am uh my role in my
family uh my role in my community right
um th those kinds of things my identity
as a as a citizen of the United States
things things like that um so so those
are kind of age appropriate self-object
experiences um when when a person
experiences a lot of trauma a lot of
Developmental you know Interruption and
stuff like that when they're very young
they tend to persist uh in the use of
those tangible
concrete uh selfobjects um and and they
tend and they tend to be inflexible
about it so I need you to see me this
way in order for me to feel like a good
person and if it seems like you don't
see me this way right in in between
these two right if you're over here now
you're a bad object get you know and and
then there's a whole thing about that so
um so that so that would be an age
inappropriate selfobject um using other
people as selfobjects is age
inappropriate when we reach adulthood uh
but you know um somebody who's kind of
in an inflexible space where they're
really reliant on concrete self-object
experiences for self-esteem yeah they
might see a dirty kitchen sink as as a
that that could cause a collapse right
um that's 100% possible so yeah thank
you for that
question uh let's
see ribbon spice do I have advice for
writing characters with NPD
empathetically um yeah stay close to the
to the central wound um and to
the uh empty uh or fragmenting self
that's underneath the grandiosity uh
so let's see
at peace with not knowing what can a
close friend or partner of someone with
NPD do to support them in a vulnerable
state
um just be there but in a well
boundaried way so I you know my videos I
often talk about the importance of
boundaries right it is it is possible to
be kind and to be empathetic and also to
have boundaries uh so anytime you're
you're dealing with somebody who's got
any personality disorder or any kind of
really provocative interpersonal
presentation boundaries are going to be
key um be very clear for yourself where
your boundaries are and hold those
boundaries um because the nature of
personality disorders especially is to
pull people out uh of their kind of P
pull people into violating their own
boundaries because the the person person
with a personality disorder their
boundaries are are kind of non-existent
right because the self is not completely
emerged from the object so you got these
this kind of selfobject self you know
object Fusion happening um and and so
they will pull for in a you into um into
enactments that that violate your own
boundaries um so it's very important to
have firm boundaries but also to be kind
and supportive um and you know that that
looks different for each situation um
but I think those are the that's that
would be the guiding principle um that
and uh I guess I would say you want to
validate without gratifying um so uh the
person if they're in crisis they they
they they want gratification right I I
have a need meet It event immediately
right the the pressure behind my need is
so great that I need for you to
meet it right here right now um and and
often in order to meet that need you
would have to violate a boundary uh one
of your own boundaries and so hold the
boundary validate the feeling of Crisis
or pressure or emergency behind what
they're saying but don't gratify what
they're asking for if it violates your
boundary um
gosh guys I'm get I'm getting a little
tired here but I I'm I'm uh interested
in in
continuing uh maybe until about 3:30 if
possible
um so I'm gonna I'm not going to keep
answering every question uh because I
think there's a lot of questions um but
I'm going to look and see if I can pull
out uh ones that might
be more broadly
um
applicable okay why do people with NPD
keep repeating the same patterns of
behavior and never learn from their
mistakes over and over
again um low Insight uh that's that's
essentially what it is that and um and
splitting um so splitting is best way to
think about splitting is this uh imagine
um an an AR pelo okay like Hawaii okay
so the Hawaiian Islands look like
separate Islands from the surface of the
ocean if you go underneath the ocean you
see that they're all connected they're
all part of the same mountain chain
right and these are just the peaks of
these mountains sticking up above the
surface of the water but if you don't go
underwater you just see separate Islands
okay so what psychology is learning is
that um none of us have kind of like a a
unipolar self okay there's no sort of
central
stable um construct that is self what we
really have are multiple selves uh and
ideally those multiple selves are well
integrated the lines of communication
between them are robust uh and and the
transition between these different self
States is uh smooth and not disruptive
to the person's functioning and to their
relationships okay so you can could
think about these as centers of
emotional gravity you could think about
these as different ways that the self
has come to be defined in relation to an
experience of other right so there's a
self for me that's kind of defined in
relation to my mother there's a self for
me that's defined in relation to my
father there's one that's defined in
relation to my best friend in grade
school to my second grade teacher to my
boss to my spouse to my you know right
okay so all these different
that are defined in relation to all
these different experiences of other
people ideally the difference between
all those is mild it's it's there's not
huge Stark differences and where there
are Stark differences um there's a lot
of communication between all the other
parts right
okay what can happen uh in especially
personality disorders is that all those
different self States
uh become like separate islands of
experience uh where the communication is
poor between them where a storm
happening on one of them you know isn't
storm can be happening on one of them
but not on another one uh each has their
own distinct ecosystem right okay so
this I'm starting to kind of wear out
the metaphor
but basically uh these these separations
between these self states are uh
reinforced
uh via dissociation and Trauma okay so
it it prevents the person from
integrating all these different parts of
themselves all these different centers
of emotional gravity and what you end up
with are uh
siloed you know parts of the self um and
so when the person is on you know Maui
right it has nothing to do with what's
going on on aahu uh or when they're in
one Silo it has nothing to do with
what's in the other Silo okay and so the
transition between those different self
States can be incredibly abrupt um and
uh and and typically when the transition
happens there's very little memory of
what it was like in The Other Self state
right because again the lines of
communication between them are disrupted
via dissociative phenomena uh and so um
we call this splitting all right so when
a person is splitting that it's not just
that they see you through a different
lens okay they are a different self
experiencing you differently than the
self that was experiencing you five
minutes before or last year or whatever
um and and all of reality is is
Rewritten according to this new center
of emotional experiential and relational
gravity um and and so this is the this
is why the behavior of people with
personality disorders seem so
inconsistent and confusing and why one
day they're like oh my gosh you're right
I I've got a problem and I need I need
help thank you how can I get help and
then the next day they're like screw you
what are you talking about I never said
that right that that has to do with
splitting and the disruption of the
continuity of internal experience that
is part and parcel to personality
disorders and so that's another reason
why a person can repeat the same
mistakes over and over and over again in
their life and never seem to benefit
from any insight because those mistakes
are siloed you know in one kind of self
experience and and the other self-
experiences don't don't have access to
it um this is different than
dissociative identity disorder it's I'm
not talking about multiple personalities
here although I would say dissociative
identity disorder is a very very extreme
form of splitting um but but uh this is
this is something that many people with
multiple personality disorders
experience it's it's kind of um the term
would be pathon neonic or you know
characteristic of um borderline
personality disorder in particular but
also narcissistic personality disorder
um splitting so that's the answer um
thanks for the
question
Cooper is asking am I using a fancy
camera mic lighting or something simple
and do I edit my videos myself do I
teach myself about the technology I'm
using or does someone do it for
you well that depends on whether you
think things look good or
not no um so uh yeah this is all this
just me uh right now I'm using a
Logitech uh webcam that my mounted on a
tripod in front of my computer monitor
um and I've got two ring lights that
light me um and then when I make my
videos I use the Sony zv E10 uh camera
uh and I feel like it's got pretty good
results uh although it's it's a steep
learning curve how to use the camera I
had to watch a few YouTube videos to
teach me how to do that uh I do edit all
my videos myself I use something called
moav which is like a it's like a soft
software
suite um less it's less involved than
like the Adobe
products or something like d Vinci or
something like that uh I tried using
both of those and I was so quickly
overwhelmed that I just stuck with with
mavi it's it's fairly simple and
straightforward uh and once you get the
hang of you know how to do the cuts and
stuff like that it goes pretty quickly
um I ultimately I I hope to grow big
enough as a channel that I can Outsource
video editing because it takes up a lot
of time um but for now I'm a I'm a onean
operation U everything is is done by me
uh and um and I teach myself to do it
watching videos on YouTube so thanks for
the
question
uh let's
see
oh what does it mean when NPD is said to
have a schizoid
core
um okay so getting back to my my man
Stephen Johnson
um he has these great
uh
names
um for uh
different different personality Styles
okay so he
calls uh narcissism and I've said this
before in my in some of my videos he
calls narciss NPD or narcissism the um
the used child okay and what he's saying
there is that the experience the early
attachment experiences in narcissism
they have to do with a kind of
exploitative exploitative care uh where
the child feels that they're they have
to be some other version of themselves
in order to deserve love and that's the
Genesis of the false self and the the
grandiosity uh and interpersonal
inflexibility that people with NPD tend
to
exhibit so that's the used
child uh Johnson calls the skeid
experience the hated child um and that's
because um the these schizoid experience
is is dominated by
uh rejection and overwhelm um and the
person has to go inside in order to
escape an object world that seems filled
with hurtful objects um hurtful
caregivers um I think that uh NPD and
and and schizoid organizations they they
they tend to go hand inand uh not all
the time though uh I don't think that
NPD has a schizoid core um but I think
that the sorts of relational experiences
early on that tend to generate the
schizoid versus the narcissistic
experience they can be similar um so
thank
you let's see
Brandon uh says he's late um but thanks
for joining us nonetheless um Brandon
comments quite a bit on my videos and
his comments are always um well informed
uh and so uh I appreciate you you being
here
let's see
um do I know if ketamin infusion therapy
can Aid with self-abandonment I'm not
sure what that means um and I don't know
much about ketaman therapy although uh
there is another Mark Eaton who lives in
Florida who specializes in ketamin uh
therapy for I think for treatment
resistant depression uh and he's a
psychiatrist um but um anyway he he
might have the answer the the other Mark
edenson might know the answer to this
question uh and there's no relation that
I'm aware of by the way I mean there
probably is somewhere way back when but
none none
immediate uh let's
see
what uh user asks why do they find it
easier constantly seeking sources of
admiration from new people isn't that
more exhausting um well it's because
that new person isn't uh sullied by um
disappointing experience right so when
somebody's uh doing a particular version
of splitting where they're idealizing
other people people um they are
constantly in in search of shiny new
objects to idealize because uh the more
they get to know the more experience
they generate with that idealized other
person uh the harder it gets to continue
idealizing them because little
disappointments and frustrations start
to build up until eventually there's a
kind of critical mass reached and the
idealizations invert and turn to
devaluations um and that you know so pop
psychology would call that the love
bombing and discard cycle um it's based
on splitting though um not some kind of
like you know nefarious manipulation or
whatever
um but that's why that's that's why
there's a constant search for novel
objects to idealize um and because the
person is is seeking to prop up the
false self-experience via association
with idealized others um and so if the
person the other person can no longer be
idealized that jeopardizes the um
stability of the false self and so they
got to find somebody else to idealize uh
I want to emphasize none of this is like
uh premeditated right it's not like the
person is like uhoh you know the the
clock on my idealizations is running out
I better go find myself a new object to
love bomb and that's none of that's
happening I don't know if anybody out
there thinks that happening it certainly
seems like some people think that's
happening and it certainly seems like
some people are basing like their whole
career off of that idea that that's
what's happening but that's not what
what's happening at least not if we're
talking about pathological narcissism
like the mental illness of it maybe
we're talking about like somebody who's
just kind of a jerk or whatever and
maybe they're out there doing that but
um but that's not NPD
so um what else we have
uh goodness gracious there's so many
questions I'm so guys I'm just I'm
overwhelmed by how
many how many how many of you showed up
and how many questions there are here
it's I'm
like um I I wish that I could spend five
hours and answer every single one
um okay here's a good one a lot of good
questions iser
um how do I explain inability demand am
moralistic behaviors especially with
with respect to crossing boundaries
greed lying exploiting
vulnerabil vulnerability for Money
Services attention and admir okay so
basically like the unrepentant you know
uh aspects of of some NPD presentations
um
so I think that
immorality can go hand inand with
grandiosity um it's not that the person
doesn't have a doesn't know what's right
and wrong because that's they you know
they might know what the difference
between right and wrong but I think
often there's the lack of a strong uh
intrin moral compass because that would
be based on a strong set of values and a
strong set of values is based typically
unless it's some kind of crazy
inflexible radical thing um but a a
strong set of values is is typically
firmly rooted in a sense of self um and
so you know if there is not a strong
stable sense of self then there's going
to be um that's going to affect a
person's moral compass uh and they're
going to be more easily kind of BL
around by the affective forces inside of
them uh so they're going to be pushed by
pressures inside
toward um all kinds of things imp
impulsivity ways of acting out there
insecurities ways of getting immediate
needs
met um idealizations and
devaluations uh all that kind of stuff
so they're just kind of like blown
around right uh by by these things um
and as a result they often you know it
can it can uh result in in you know
criminal behavior um boundary violating
Behavior insensitive Behavior stuff like
that okay so that's how that happens but
now if you try to hold somebody
accountable for their
actions the that kind of those Silo
self- experiences I was talking about
earlier that's when they come into play
okay so when the person was acting out
in that way they might have been over
here in this Silo and now when you're
talking to them about it later they're
over here in this Silo right and so
there's a tendency to rationalize the
things that they did before so that the
justification matches the thoughts and
feelings that are available in this Silo
see they don't have access to what's
over here in this Silo right anymore uh
because of splitting and so so there's a
tendency to kind of make things up right
and they don't realize they're making
things up they they might think they're
telling you the truth
because the reasons they're giving now
are consistent with how they would think
and act in this self state but they did
the thing they did in another self State
uh and and so that's that's the
confusing piece about splitting um is
that you get all kinds of like really
inconsistent behaviors and then kind of
post Hawk rationalizations for those
behaviors that don't make any sense but
they do to the person telling you and
and you're like H this person's clearly
a liar right and they must be
manipulating me um and that's not
necessarily true they may not know that
they're lying uh and they may only be
manipulating you in the loosest sense of
the term in that uh the personality
disorder typically involves you know
interpersonal manipulation an
emotionally coercive Behavior but not
like studied manipulation typically it's
more like just behaving toward people in
a way that kind of pulls them into
providing the kinds of self-object
experiences that the narcissist needs to
sustain the false self um so uh I don't
know I hope that answers the
question let's
see um
um looks like there's a conversation
here about Psy
psychedelics lot of yeah lot of kind of
cross talk people talking about what I'm
saying as I'm saying it which is awesome
um somebody's asking if I could talk
about
splitting uh and and I I did um so
hopefully that's that was
helpful
um somebody else says Walter White is
definitely a
narcissist I
agree
uh I
say
uh okay what are my
thoughts on Psychopathic personalities
and their relation to pathological
narcissism um I so I don't think that
psychopathy is a type of pathological
narcissism I think that it's uh
different in kind not degree uh from
pathological narcissism pathological
narcissism has to do with um you know a
feeling of self that's fragmenting and
falling apart uh and then the ways that
we compensate for
that the fundamental thing about
narcissists is that they are still
interpersonally
invested uh they still even if it
doesn't feel like they need you they
absolutely need you I've never worked
with a narcissist who was not profoundly
interpersonally dependent um and The
Well of dependency that sits underneath
the grandio false self-presentation feel
feels
bottomless um and and that's because it
belongs to such a young self uh and just
think about how much little kids need
right um and so so there's this this
self-experience that sits at the center
of narcissism that is incredibly
dependent um and therefore incredibly
invested in relationship even if the
external um presentation is avoidant
right that avoidance is based on the
feel on the fear of rejection okay and
of being hurt okay so there's a
vulnerability there right when we talk
about narcissism we talk about
grandiosity we talk about vulnerability
now when we talk about psychopathy we're
not talking about vulnerability and
we're not talking about uh relational
investment okay we're not talking about
dependency we're not talking about
insecurity uh what we're talking about
is power and uh and the pursuit of power
via something called omnipotent control
which is a um it would be uh considered
to be a an early or primitive
psychological defense um where the
person is trying to literally control
other people
um that is not so much a relational
investment that it it belongs to a
younger self in other words um and uh
and and so I think that that psych
Psychopathic
personalities uh first of all they can
be influ that can be influenced by um
measurable um differences in the size of
the amydala um but uh from a
psychological perspective I would see
psychopathy as a different branch on the
tree than
narcissism all
right just got a couple minutes
left let's
see
just want to share there's a lady who
recovered from NPD called Lisa
charaba we can do it that name is
incredibly familiar to me and I'm not
sure
[Music]
why ah
uhhuh okay so I don't know if it's the
same Lisa charab but um she somebody
named Lisa charab uh reached out to me
about 9 years ago um when I first
started to specialize in this kind of
explicitly so I first started to put it
on my website and stuff like that uh
Somebody by that name reached out to me
because she had written a book called
you might be a narcissist if it's kind
of like based on like The Jeff Foxworthy
bit um and uh and she said that she had
all all these people you know seeking
help for narcissist ISM and she needed
somewhere to refer them um and she and I
had a few phone call like phone
conversations about it and um and I I
don't know I didn't hear from
her since that time so uh I I don't I
don't know if she's since kind of come
out as somebody who's recovered from NPD
um but if so you know more power to her
um and I'm glad to know that um that
there's somebody out there who's you
know um able to serve as a as a model
for how that's possible if it's the same
person I don't know if it's the same
person but it would be funny if it was
uh not funny haha but just an
interesting coincidence
anyway let's see uh we're just about at
the time here and gosh I'm so
sorry uh if I
didn't uh answer your question but
there's a lot of great questions here
I'm going to go through them and I might
end up making a video out of one or two
of these um I guess you know the last
thing I want to talk about uh
before I end um I guess you know I just
realized that I should probably talk
about some of the services that I offer
um you know as a clinician um so I offer
the following Services um I offer
individual Psychotherapy although my
current currently my individual
Psychotherapy practice is full uh but I
do have a weight list and you can access
that on my website um I also offer group
psycho therapy and that's a new service
that I'm offering uh I've got a group
going um and um and I I feel like it's
it's going well I feel like the the
group members are finding it helpful um
and so I'm interested in expanding my
group uh treatment options so if you're
interested in group therapy please let
me know you can send me an email there's
a form on my website um also a benefit
to group therapy is that it's cheaper
than individual therapy it's more
affordable and um you get a a pure
experience so you get you get to uh be
supported by more than just me um and I
think that the group members that that
are currently in my groups are finding
that helpful as well it helps with shame
embarrassment humiliation all those kind
of like awful feelings that sit at the
core helps with that uh so check that
out I also offer diagnostic assessments
and those are comprehensive Services um
there's uh somebody here who
um has been through that process um and
uh you know so um that's that's another
thing that I provide it's it's different
it's different that just like I don't
just meet with you once and diagnose uh
we meet you know for a period of a month
or more um and uh and at the end I write
I generate a comprehensive uh report uh
that you know talks about personality
Styles and the presence of personality
disorder and other uh issues that might
be going on um and I I really strive to
do that from within uh an empa empathic
and and um and compassionate and
developmentally informed perspective
okay so it's not just writing down a
list of disorders it's it's a it's a
narrative about how this how the person
got where where they are with
recommendations about what to do going
forward and I also uh offer um
consultations for family members and
loved ones those are time limited uh
typically between one and three sessions
uh and I do Reserve sometimes in my my
week uh for those so if you'd like to um
consult uh let me know again all this is
available on my
website thank you so much everyone for
being here um and uh I'm gonna gonna do
this more uh this has been um
overwhelming to me uh and I'm just I'm
so happy to know that so many people are
interested in this uh and um and happy
to be helpful if if I can so um thank
you so much everyone I'm going to go
ahead and end the stream now and um look
for this video on my YouTube channel
heel
NPD um and uh thanks again okay take
care